Adding SQLColumnCheckOperator and SQLTableCheckOperator to the SQL Check guide. (#396)
astronomer/airflow-guides: guides/airflow-sql-data-quality-tutorial.md

### Requirements

The SQLColumnCheckOperator and the SQLTableCheckOperator are available in the [common SQL provider package](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/) available with:

```bash
pip install apache-airflow-providers-common-sql
```

The SQLCheckOperator and legacy SQL Check Operators are built into the Airflow core.

### Database Connection

The SQL Check Operators work with any database that can be queried using SQL. You simply have to define your [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) in the Airflow UI and then pass the connection id to the operator parameter `conn_id`.

> **Note**: Currently the operators cannot support BigQuery `job_id`s.

The target table can be specified as a string using the `table` parameter for the SQLColumnCheckOperator and SQLTableCheckOperator. When using the SQLCheckOperator you can override the database defined in your Airflow connection by passing a different value to the `database` argument. The target table for the SQLCheckOperator has to be given within the SQL statement.

> Under the hood the operators use the information provided in the Airflow connection to get a [DbApiHook](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/hooks/dbapi/index.html#module-airflow.hooks.dbapi).

Reviewer: Do you think this info will be relevant to most users? This seems pretty in the weeds to me, and I think we could take it out unless there's a practical application of that info. But I'll leave it up to you!

Author: I think you are right, there isn't really a reason to interact with the Hook for most users (I didn't so far for the data quality dag).

## Examples

The following examples show you when and how to use SQL Check Operators.

### Example 1 - `SQLColumnCheckOperator`

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` uses a dictionary to define checks via the parameter `column_mapping`. The strength of this operator is the ability to run a multitude of checks within one task but still have observability on which checks passed and which failed within the Airflow logs.

This check is useful for:

- Ensuring all values in a column are above a minimum, below a maximum or within a certain range (with or without a tolerance threshold).
- Null checks.
- Checking primary key columns for uniqueness.
- Checking the number of distinct values of a column.

> In the example below 6 checks on 3 different columns are performed by the `SQLColumnCheckOperator`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, we perform 6 checks on 3 different columns using the `SQLColumnCheckOperator`:
```

## SQL Check Operators

The SQL Check Operators are versions of the `SQLOperator` that offer different abstractions over SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One main difference between the SQL Check Operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL Check Operators ultimately respond with a boolean, meaning the task will fail if any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful in stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. With Airflow's logging capabilities, the lines of code (and even specific values in lines) which fail the check are highly observable (see the section 'Observability' at the end of the guide).

The following SQL Check Operators are recommended for implementing data quality checks:

> - **`SQLColumnCheckOperator`**: An operator capable of running multiple pre-defined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.

Reviewer 2: Link: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/stable/operators.html#check-sql-table-columns

Reviewer 2: https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator

> - **`SQLTableCheckOperator`**: An operator to run multiple checks involving aggregate functions for one or more columns.

Reviewer 2: Link: https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/stable/operators.html#check-sql-table-values

Reviewer: We should link to the registry for these wherever possible though...

Reviewer 2: https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator

Reviewer 2: https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator

> - **[`SQLCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLCheckOperator)**: A flexible operator that takes any SQL query. This operator is useful for more complicated checks (e.g. including `WHERE` statements or spanning several tables of your database).

Reviewer 2: I would also add a note that it only returns a _single_ row as a result.

The newly added `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` are set to replace the following three legacy operators with more narrow functionality. We recommend against using these legacy operators if the ones listed above work for your use case.

- [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLValueCheckOperator): A simpler operator that can be used when a specific, known value is being checked either as an exact value or within a percentage threshold.

> - [`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLIntervalCheckOperator): A time-based operator. Used for checking current data against historical data.

Reviewer 2: The functionality of the interval operator is not being replaced, and I have it on my docket to try and get it to emit lineage data.

- [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLThresholdCheckOperator): An operator with flexible upper and lower thresholds, where the threshold bounds may also be described as SQL queries that return a numeric value.

### Requirements

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and the `SQLTableCheckOperator` are available in the [common SQL provider package](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/) which can be installed with:

```bash
pip install apache-airflow-providers-common-sql
```

> The `SQLCheckOperator` and legacy SQL Check Operators are built into core Airflow and do not require a separate package installation.

Reviewer 2: I would just name them all here because they aren't actually legacy operators, they're still being maintained (I think that's the definition?)

Author: Hmm I actually don't know the definition 😅 , but yes will change it!

### Database Connection

The SQL Check Operators work with any database that can be queried using SQL. You simply have to define your [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) in the Airflow UI and then pass the connection id to the operator parameter `conn_id`.

> **Note**: Currently the operators cannot support BigQuery `job_id`s.

The target table can be specified as a string using the `table` parameter for the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator`. When using the `SQLCheckOperator` , you can override the database defined in your Airflow connection as needed by passing a different value to the `database` argument. The target table for the `SQLCheckOperator` has to be given within the SQL statement.

## Example - `SQLColumnCheckOperator`

> The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` uses a dictionary to define checks via the parameter `column_mapping`. The strength of this operator is the ability to run a multitude of checks within one task but still have observability on which checks passed and which failed within the Airflow logs.

Reviewer 2: > ...checks within one task but still have observability on...
I would change to:
" ...checks within one task and have observability for..."

This check is useful for:

- Ensuring all values in a column are above a minimum, below a maximum or within a certain range (with or without a tolerance threshold).
- Null checks.
- Checking primary key columns for uniqueness.
- Checking the number of distinct values of a column.

In the example below, we perform 6 checks on 3 different columns using the `SQLColumnCheckOperator`:

- Check that "MY_DATE_COL" contains only _unique_ dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01.
- Check that "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values and no `NULL` values present.

> - Check that "MY_NUM_COL" contains a maximum value between 90 and 110 (100 with a tolerance of 10).

Reviewer 2: I think this should be:
Check that "MY_NUM_COL" contains a maximum value of 100 with a 10% tolerance, i.e. accepting values between 90 and 110.

```python
check_columns = SQLColumnCheckOperator(
        task_id="check_columns",
        conn_id=<your database connection id>,

>         table=<your table>,

Reviewer 2: ```
conn_id="example_conn",
table="example_table",
```

        column_mapping={
            "MY_DATE_COL": {
                "min": {"greater_than": datetime.date(2017, 1, 1)},

>                 "max": {"less_than": datetime.date(2022, 1, 1)},

Reviewer 2: It's awesome that these work, I just had to check in a python REPL because I hadn't thought to check dates like this. Can they be used with a tolerance, though? If not, would be worth mentioning in a note.

Author: I use that on all date columns in the data quality dag 😄 

You are right, it doesn't work with tolerance:

```
[2022-07-22, 15:56:06 UTC] {taskinstance.py:1889} ERROR - Task failed with exception
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/airflow/providers/common/sql/operators/sql.py", line 130, in execute
    self.column_mapping[column][checks[idx]]["success"] = self._get_match(
  File "/usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/airflow/providers/common/sql/operators/sql.py", line 148, in _get_match
    match_boolean = record >= check_values["geq_to"] * (1 - tolerance)
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for *: 'datetime.datetime' and 'int'
```

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, can always turn it into a timestamp and then tolerance would be... interesting, though possible.

Author: 🤔 Yeah you could probably make a function that figures out what tolerance is with regards to that for x amount of days/hours etc... I try to mess with datetime as little as possible though 😅

                "unique_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_TEXT_COL": {
                "distinct_check": {"geq_than": 10},
                "null_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_NUM_COL": {

>                 "max": {"equal_to": 100, "tolerance": 10}

Reviewer 2: `tolerance` needs to be given as a decimal, this would be a 1000% tolerance 😂

Author: Can I pretend like I intended to do that? 😂 thanks!

            },
        }
    )
```

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` offers 5 options for column checks which are abstractions over SQL statements:

- "min": `"MIN(column) AS column_min"`
- "max" `"MAX(column) AS column_max"`
- "unique_check": `"COUNT(column) - COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_unique_check"`
- "distinct_check" `"COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_distinct_check"`
- "null_check": `"SUM(CASE WHEN column IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS column_null_check"`

The resulting values then can be compared to a value input by the DAG author by using any of the qualifiers:

- `greater_than`
- `geq_to` (greater or equal than)
- `equal_to`
- `leq_to` (lesser or equal than)
- `less_than`

> If the resulting boolean value is `True` the check passes, otherwise it fails. Each individual check and its result will get logged into the Airflow [task logs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/logging/).

Reviewer 2: The set of returned records always gets logged to Airflow, but *only* the failed tests get logged with the check and result.

Reviewer 2: I see you get into this further down, but would be good to clarify here as well.

The screenshot below shows the output of 3 successful checks that ran on the `DATE` column of a table in Snowflake using `SQLColumnCheckOperator`. The checks concerned the minimum value, the maximum value and the amount of null values in the column.
The logged line `INFO - Record: (datetime.date(2021, 4, 9), datetime.date(2022, 7, 17), 0)` lists the results of the query: the minimum date was 2021-09-04, the maximum date 2022-07-17 and there were zero null values, which satisfied the conditions of the check.

![SQLColumnCheckOperator logging of passing checks](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/sql-data-quality-tutorial/column_checks_passed.png)

> All checks that fail will be listed at the end of the task log with their full SQL query and specific check that failed. The screenshot shows how the `TASK_DURATION` column failed the check to have a minimum of greater than or equal 0 by having a minimum of -1251 instead.

Reviewer 2: The wording here is a bit convoluted in the second sentence, I think 2 sentences would make it easier to read:

> The screenshot shows how the `TASK_DURATION` column failed the check to have a minimum of greater than or equal 0 by having a minimum of -1251 instead.

Something like:
The screenshot shows how the `TASK_DURATION` column failed the check. Instead of a minimum that is greater than or equal to 0, it had a minimum of -1251.

![SQLColumnCheckOperator logging of failed checks](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/sql-data-quality-tutorial/column_checks_failed.png)

## Example - `SQLTableCheckOperator`

> The `SQLTableCheckOperator` provides a way to check the validity of SQL statements containing aggregates over the whole table. There is no limit to the amount of columns these statements can involve or to their complexity. They are provided to the operator as a dictionary via the `checks` parameter.

Reviewer 2: They --> "The statements"

> The `SQLTableCheckOperator` is useful for:

Reviewer 2: Also for row count checks on the table, and potentially schema checks as well. The fix to that aggregate-only bug should be out soon, although not released for a bit. Might just be worth putting a note in that in `1.0.0`, non-fully-aggregated statements should be in their own operator.

Author: Ah interesting! I've been running into non-fully-aggregated statements suddenly not working, didn't realize that was because I added an aggregated one to the same operator. I added a note on it :)

- Checks that include aggregate values using the whole table (e.g. comparing the average of one column to the average of another using the SQL `AVG()` function).
- Row sum checks.
- Comparisons between multiple columns.

In the example below, two checks are defined: `my_row_count_check` and `my_column_sum_comparison_check` (the names can be freely chosen). The first check runs a SQL statement asserting that the table contains at least 1000 rows, while the second check compares the sum of two columns.

```python
table_checks = SQLTableCheckOperator(
    task_id="table_checks",
    conn_id=<your database connection id>,
    table=<your table>,
    checks={
        "my_row_count_check": {
            "check_statement": "COUNT(*) >= 1000"
            },
        "my_column_sum_comparison_check": {

>             "check_statement": "SUM(MY_COL_1) < SUM(MY_COL_2)"

Reviewer 2: So this can be `my_col_1 < my_col_2` as long as it's in its own operator. For now.

Author: I added a third example in its own operator to show non-aggregated statements :)

The following SQL Check Operators are recommended for implementing data quality checks:

- **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: An operator capable of running multiple pre-defined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.
- **[`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator)**: An operator to run multiple checks involving aggregate functions for one or more columns.
- **[`SQLCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLCheckOperator)**: A flexible operator that takes any SQL query and returns a single row that will be evaluated to booleans. This operator is useful for more complicated checks (e.g. including `WHERE` statements or spanning several tables of your database).
- **[`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLIntervalCheckOperator)**: A time-based operator. Used for checking current data against historical data.

> The functionality of the older `SQLValueCheckOperator` and `SQLThresholdCheckOperator` are being replaced by the newer `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator`.

Author: I think I may have created the wrong impression by using "replaced" but I am not sure.

The two new operators are much more powerful than the old ones but not 1:1 with regards to taking over the functionality. Like for example the old operators could run checks involving several tables, which the two new ones cannot do (yet). 

So it isn't a full replacement but we want to encourage people to use the new operators over the old ones because they offer much cleaner code for the most common use cases and hopefully will fully replace the old ones one day.

Maybe something like:

> **Note**: We recommend the use of `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` over the `SQLValueCheckOperator` and `SQLThresholdCheckOperator` whenever possible to improve code readability.

? 🙂

- [`SQLValueCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLValueCheckOperator): A simpler operator that can be used when a specific, known value is being checked either as an exact value or within a percentage threshold.

> - [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLThresholdCheckOperator): An operator with flexible upper and lower thresholds, where the threshold bounds may also be described as SQL queries that return a numeric value.

Author: Yeah I think I let you astray by using "replace functionality", sorry about that 😅 . 

There are reasons to not use the new operators, e.g. if you want to run a check on several tables or use WHERE selections, subqueries etc. But all of those can be done using the `SQLCheckOperator` too. 
SQLValue and SQLThreshold just offer a little bit of abstraction over SQLCheck, not really anything more, while SQLColumn and SQLTable offer to clean up the code a ton and running several checks in one operator.  Hence why we try to steer people towards those two. 

Does that make sense?

> - [`SQLThresholdCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLThresholdCheckOperator): An operator with flexible upper and lower thresholds, where the threshold bounds may also be described as SQL queries that return a numeric value.

Reviewer 3: Got it, sounds like they're not deprecated enough to remove from the guide entirely. Per my suggestion above, let's write a quick introductory sentence explaining that these operators are legacy options and then explain what to use in place of them.

### Requirements

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and the `SQLTableCheckOperator` are available in the [common SQL provider package](https://pypi.org/project/apache-airflow-providers-common-sql/) which can be installed with:

```bash
pip install apache-airflow-providers-common-sql
```

The `SQLCheckOperator`, `SQLIntervalCheckOperator`, `SQLValueCheckOperator` and `SQLThresholdCheckOperator` are built into core Airflow and do not require a separate package installation.

### Database Connection

> The SQL Check Operators work with any database that can be queried using SQL. You simply have to define your [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) in the Airflow UI and then pass the connection id to the operator parameter `conn_id`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The SQL Check operators work with any database that can be queried using SQL. You simply have to define your [connection](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/connections/) in the Airflow UI and then pass the connection id to the operator's `conn_id` parameter.
```

> **Note**: Currently the operators cannot support BigQuery `job_id`s.

> The target table can be specified as a string using the `table` parameter for the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator`. When using the `SQLCheckOperator` , you can override the database defined in your Airflow connection as needed by passing a different value to the `database` argument. The target table for the `SQLCheckOperator` has to be given within the SQL statement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The target table can be specified as a string using the `table` parameter for the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator`. When using the `SQLCheckOperator`, you can override the database defined in your Airflow connection as needed by passing a different value to the `database` argument. The target table for the `SQLCheckOperator` has to be given within the SQL statement.
```

## Example - `SQLColumnCheckOperator`

> The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` uses a dictionary to define checks via the parameter `column_mapping`. The strength of this operator is the ability to run a multitude of checks within one task and still have observability on which checks passed and which failed within the Airflow logs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` has a `column_mapping` parameter which stores a dictionary of checks. Using this dictionary, it can run many checks within one task and still provide observability in the Airflow logs over which checks passed and which failed.
```

- Check that "MY_DATE_COL" contains only _unique_ dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01.
- Check that "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values and no `NULL` values present.
- Check that "MY_NUM_COL" contains a maximum value of 100 with a 10% tolerance, i.e. accepting values between 90 and 110.

```python
check_columns = SQLColumnCheckOperator(
        task_id="check_columns",
        conn_id=example_conn,
        table=example_table,
        column_mapping={
            "MY_DATE_COL": {
                "min": {"greater_than": datetime.date(2017, 1, 1)},
                "max": {"less_than": datetime.date(2022, 1, 1)},
                "unique_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_TEXT_COL": {
                "distinct_check": {"geq_than": 10},
                "null_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_NUM_COL": {
                "max": {"equal_to": 100, "tolerance": 0.1}
            },
        }
    )
```

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` offers 5 options for column checks which are abstractions over SQL statements:

- "min": `"MIN(column) AS column_min"`

> - "max" `"MAX(column) AS column_max"`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- "max": `"MAX(column) AS column_max"`
```

- "unique_check": `"COUNT(column) - COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_unique_check"`

> - "distinct_check" `"COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_distinct_check"`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- "distinct_check": `"COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_distinct_check"`
```

- "null_check": `"SUM(CASE WHEN column IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS column_null_check"`

> The resulting values then can be compared to a value input by the DAG author by using any of the qualifiers:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resulting values can be compared to an expected value using any of the following qualifiers:
```

- `greater_than`
- `geq_to` (greater or equal than)
- `equal_to`
- `leq_to` (lesser or equal than)
- `less_than`

> > **Note**: If you are dealing with floats or integers you can add a tolerance to the comparisons in form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance) as shown in the example above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note**: If you are dealing with floats or integers you can add a tolerance to the comparisons in form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance) as shown in the previous example.
```

> If the resulting boolean value is `True` the check passes, otherwise it fails. [Airflow logs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/logging/) the set of returned records for every check that passes and the full query and result for checks that failed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the resulting boolean value is `True` the check passes, otherwise it fails. [Airflow generates logs](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/logging/) that show the set of returned records for every check that passes and the full query and result for checks that failed.
```

> The screenshot below shows the output of 3 successful checks that ran on the `DATE` column of a table in Snowflake using `SQLColumnCheckOperator`. The checks concerned the minimum value, the maximum value and the amount of null values in the column.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The screenshot below shows the output of 3 successful checks that ran on the `DATE` column of a table in Snowflake using `SQLColumnCheckOperator`. The checks concerned the minimum value, the maximum value, and the amount of null values in the column.

```

The logged line `INFO - Record: (datetime.date(2021, 4, 9), datetime.date(2022, 7, 17), 0)` lists the results of the query: the minimum date was 2021-09-04, the maximum date 2022-07-17 and there were zero null values, which satisfied the conditions of the check.

> ![SQLColumnCheckOperator logging of passing checks](https://assets2.astronomer.io/main/guides/sql-data-quality-tutorial/column_checks_passed.png)

Reviewer 3: Sorry because this will be a lot of monotonous work 🙈 but I think logs like this should be in code blocks rather than screenshots. It makes the text more accessible and lets people copy and paste values. Plus it makes the logs searchable, so that anyone running into failed check information and searching about it might come across this guide!

Reviewer: Oooh being able to search for the log content in the guide is a really good point! We may have log screenshots in other guides that we want to update during the migration...

Author: Yeah that is a great idea! (also solves the problem of can we show our internal table name in a guide 😉)

In this guide, we'll highlight three SQL Check operators and show examples how each of them can be used to build a robust data quality suite for your DAGs. If you aren't familiar with SQL operators in general, check out Astronomer's [SQL tutorial](https://www.astronomer.io/guides/airflow-sql-tutorial) first.

## SQL Check Operators

The SQL Check operators are versions of the `SQLOperator` that abstract SQL queries to streamline data quality checks. One difference between the SQL Check operators and the standard [`BaseSQLOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.BaseSQLOperator) is that the SQL Check operators respond with a boolean, meaning the task will fail if any of the resulting queries fail. This is particularly helpful in stopping a data pipeline before bad data makes it to a given destination. With Airflow's logging capabilities, the lines of code and values which fail the check are highly observable.

The following SQL Check operators are recommended for implementing data quality checks:

> - **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: Runs multiple pre-defined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **[`SQLColumnCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqlcolumncheckoperator)**: Runs multiple predefined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.
```

- **[`SQLTableCheckOperator`](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/common-sql/modules/sqltablecheckoperator)**: Runs multiple checks involving aggregate functions for one or more columns.
- **[`SQLCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLCheckOperator)**: Takes any SQL query and returns a single row that is evaluated to booleans. This operator is useful for more complicated checks (e.g. including `WHERE` statements or spanning several tables of your database).
- **[`SQLIntervalCheckOperator`](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLIntervalCheckOperator)**: Checks current data against historical data.

> > **Note**: We recommend the use of the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` and `SQLTableCheckOperator` over the `SQLValueCheckOperator` and `SQLThresholdCheckOperator` whenever possible to improve code readability.

Reviewer 3: We start with an introductory sentence about what these two operators are, and move this sentence until after the definitions below.

        table=example_table,
        column_mapping={
            "MY_DATE_COL": {
                "min": {"greater_than": datetime.date(2017, 1, 1)},
                "max": {"less_than": datetime.date(2022, 1, 1)},
                "unique_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_TEXT_COL": {
                "distinct_check": {"geq_than": 10},
                "null_check": {"equal_to": 0}
            },
            "MY_NUM_COL": {
                "max": {"equal_to": 100, "tolerance": 0.1}
            },
        }
    )
```

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` offers 5 options for column checks which are abstractions over SQL statements:

- "min": `"MIN(column) AS column_min"`
- "max": `"MAX(column) AS column_max"`
- "unique_check": `"COUNT(column) - COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_unique_check"`
- "distinct_check": `"COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_distinct_check"`
- "null_check": `"SUM(CASE WHEN column IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS column_null_check"`

The resulting values can be compared to an expected value using any of the following qualifiers:

- `greater_than`
- `geq_to` (greater or equal than)
- `equal_to`
- `leq_to` (lesser or equal than)
- `less_than`

> > **Note**: If you are dealing with floats or integers you can add a tolerance to the comparisons in form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance) as shown in the previous example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note**: If you are dealing with floats or integers you can add a tolerance to the comparisons in the form of a fraction (0.1 = 10% tolerance) as shown in the previous example.
```

    raise AirflowException(
airflow.exceptions.AirflowException: Test failed
Query:
SELECT MIN(TASK_DURATION) AS TASK_DURATION_min,MAX(TASK_DURATION) AS TASK_DURATION_max,SUM(CASE WHEN TASK_DURATION IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS TASK_DURATION_null_check FROM DB.SCHEMA.TABLE;
Results:
(-12, 1000, 0)
The following tests have failed:
    Check: min,
    Check Values: {'geq_to': 0, 'result': -12, 'success': False}
```

## Example - `SQLTableCheckOperator`

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` provides a way to check the validity of SQL statements containing aggregates over the whole table. There is no limit to the amount of columns these statements can involve or to their complexity. The statements are provided to the operator as a dictionary via the `checks` parameter.

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` is useful for:

- Checks that include aggregate values using the whole table (e.g. comparing the average of one column to the average of another using the SQL `AVG()` function).
- Row count checks.
- Schema checks.
- Comparisons between multiple columns, both aggregated and not aggregated.

> > **Note**: In the provider version 1.0.0 you should non-fully aggregated statements into their own operator, separate from the fully aggregated ones! How to do this is shown in the example below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Note**: You should partially aggregated statements into their own operator, separate from the fully aggregated ones. See the next example for how to do this.
```
- Looks like 1.0.0 is the only available version right now
- Should ___ partially aggregated statements? We're missing a word right now.

Author: Oh, I seem to have dropped a "put" there 😅

> - **[SQLValueCheckOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLValueCheckOperator)**: A simpler operator that is useful when a specific, known value is being checked either as an exact value or within a percentage threshold

Reviewer 2: They're being replaced -- I think we should maybe just make mention of them, but we don't have to guide people on how to use them.

> - **[SQLValueCheckOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLValueCheckOperator)**: A simpler operator that is useful when a specific, known value is being checked either as an exact value or within a percentage threshold

Author: That makes sense. I changed to focus to be on the two new operators but left in the SQLCheckOperator because I think it serves the purpose of jumping in when a check needs a WHERE or other additional statements or is across several tables, kind of as a catch all for specific use cases. Does that work?

- **[SQLIntervalCheckOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLIntervalCheckOperator)**: A time-based operator. Useful for checking current data against historical data
- **[SQLThresholdCheckOperator](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/_api/airflow/operators/sql/index.html#airflow.operators.sql.SQLThresholdCheckOperator)**: An operator with flexible upper and lower thresholds, where the threshold bounds may also be described as SQL queries that return a numeric value

> - **SQLColumnCheckOperator**: An operator capable of running multiple pre-defined data quality checks on multiple columns within the same task.

Reviewer: Somewhere in this guide we should reference the new provider. Where we do that might depend on whether we rewrite this section to _only_ talk about the provider, or keep the other operators mentioned.

- **SQLTableCheckOperator**: An operator to run checks involving aggregate functions for one or more columns.

> ## Examples

Author: I agree (see my above comment). Since you have to specify the conn_id (unless your database is at "default_conn_id") I decided to put it in the examples to avoid people forgetting about it. I explained the arguments in the Connection to a database section. Hope that works 🙂

)
```

### Example 5 - `SQLColumnCheckOperator`

> The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` uses a dictionary to define checks via the parameter `column_mapping`. The strength of this operator is the ability to run a multitude of checks within one task but still have observability on which checks passed and which failed within the Airflow logs.

Reviewer: Since you mention the benefit of visibility in the logs, maybe it would be helpful to include a screenshot showing the log output of one of these tasks?

Reviewer 2: Especially on a failure to se which specific tests failed and with what values!

This check is useful for:

- Ensuring all values in a column are above a minimum, below a maximum or within a certain range (with or without a tolerance threshold).
- Null checks.
- Checking primary key columns for uniqueness.
- Checking the number of distinct values of a column.

In the example below 6 checks on 3 different columns are performed by the `SQLColumnCheckOperator`:

> - "MY_DATE_COL" is checked to contain only _unique_ dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that "MY_DATE_COL" contains only _unique_ dates between 2017-01-01 and 2022-01-01.
```

> - "MY_TEXT_COL" is checked to have at least 10 distinct values and no `NULL` values present.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that "MY_TEXT_COL" has at least 10 distinct values and no `NULL` values present.
```

> - "MY_NUM_COL" is checked to contain a maximum value between 90 and 110 (100 with a tolerance of 10).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check that "MY_NUM_COL" contains a maximum value between 90 and 110 (100 with a tolerance of 10).
```

    )
```

The `SQLColumnCheckOperator` offers 5 options for column checks which are abstractions over SQL statements:

- "min": `"MIN(column) AS column_min"`
- "max" `"MAX(column) AS column_max"`
- "unique_check": `"COUNT(column) - COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_unique_check"`
- "distinct_check" `"COUNT(DISTINCT(column)) AS column_distinct_check"`
- "null_check": `"SUM(CASE WHEN column IS NULL THEN 1 ELSE 0 END) AS column_null_check"`

The resulting values then can be compared to a value input by the DAG author by using the qualifiers: `greater_than`, `geq_than`, `equal_to`, `leq_than` or `less_than`. If the resulting boolean value is `True` the check passes, otherwise it fails.

### Example 6 - SQLTableCheckOperator

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` provides a way to check the validity of SQL statements containing aggregates over the whole table. There is no limit to the amount of columns these statements can involve or to their complexity. They are provided to the operator as a dictionary via the `checks` parameter.

The `SQLTableCheckOperator` is useful for:

- Checks that include aggregate values using the whole table.
- Row sum checks.
- Comparisons between multiple columns.

> In the example below two checks are defined `my_row_count_check` and `my_column_sum_comparison_check` (the names can be freely chosen). The first check runs a SQL statement asserting that the table contains at least 1000 rows, while the second check compares the sum of two columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, two checks are defined `my_row_count_check` and `my_column_sum_comparison_check` (the names can be freely chosen). The first check runs a SQL statement asserting that the table contains at least 1000 rows, while the second check compares the sum of two columns.
```

```python
SQLTableCheckOperator(
    task_id="table_checks",
    conn_id=<your database connection id>,
    table=<your table>,
    checks={
        "my_row_count_check": {
            "check_statement": "COUNT(*) >= 1000"
            },
        "my_column_sum_comparison_check": {
            "check_statement": "SUM(MY_COL_1) < SUM(MY_COL_2)"
            }
    }
)
```

> Under the hood the operator performs a `CASE WHEN` statement on each of the checks assinging `1` to the checks that passed and `0` to the checks that did not. Afterwards the operator looks for the minimum of these results and marks the task as failed if the minimum is `0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the hood, the operator performs a `CASE WHEN` statement on each of the checks, assigning `1` to the checks that passed and `0` to the checks that failed. Afterwards, the operator looks for the minimum of these results and marks the task as failed if the minimum is `0`.
```

For a production pipeline, data could first be loaded from S3 to a temporary staging table, then have its quality checks completed. If the quality checks succeed, another `SQLOperator` can load the data from staging to a production table. If the data quality checks fail, the pipeline can be stopped, and the staging table can be either used to help diagnose the data issue or scrapped to save resources. To see the complete example DAG and run it for yourself, check out the [data quality demo repository](https://github.com/astronomer/airflow-data-quality-demo/).

> ### Observability

Reviewer: Wondering if we should move this section under the `SQLColumnCheckOperator` example, and then in the `SQLTableCheckOperator` section add a note saying the operator will produce logs similar to what we show above.

Since this observability piece doesn't apply to the `SQLCheckOperator` (I'm assuming), it seems a little odd to have it directly following that example.

Author: That is true yeah. The SQLCheckOperator simply always puts the full SQL code and then if the test failed or passed, so it does look quite different.
